add post (#172)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2021-10-21-segmentation-torch-android/segmentation-torch-android.Rmd

---
title: "Train in R, run on Android: Image segmentation with torch"
description: > 
 We train a model for image segmentation in R, using torch together with luz, its high-level interface. We then JIT-trace the model on example input, so as to obtain an optimized representation that can run with no R installed. Finally, we show the model being run on Android.
author:
  - name: Sigrid Keydana
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: keydanasegmentationtorchandroid
date: 10-21-2021
bibliography: bibliography.bib
categories:
  - Torch
  - Image Recognition & Image Processing
  - R
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
    toc: true
preview: images/segmentation_android.png
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

> In a sense, image segmentation is not that different from image classification. It's just that instead of categorizing an image as a whole, segmentation results in a label for *every single pixel.* And as in image classification, the categories of interest depend on the task: Foreground versus background, say; different types of tissue; different types of vegetation; et cetera.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a sense, image segmentation is not that different from image classification. It's just that instead of categorizing an image as a whole, segmentation results in a label for *every single pixel*. And as in image classification, the categories of interest depend on the task: Foreground versus background, say; different types of tissue; different types of vegetation; et cetera.
```

Reviewer: Semi-obscure rule that the punctuation doesn't get the changed font emphasis unless it's in the middle of said emphasis.

> The present post is not the first, on this blog, to treat that topic; and like all prior[^1] ones, it makes use of a U-Net architecture[^2] to achieve its goal. Central characteristics (of this post, not U-Net) are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The present post is not the first on this blog to treat that topic; and like all prior[^1] ones, it makes use of a U-Net architecture[^2] to achieve its goal. Central characteristics (of this post, not U-Net) are:
```

Reviewer: When you say "that topic" do you mean the topic of image segmentation? If no, you lost me 🙂

[^1]: Cf. [Brain image segmentation with torch](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2020-11-30-torch-brain-segmentation/) (using, non-surprisingly, `torch`), and [Image segmentation with U-Net](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2019-08-23-unet/) (using TensorFlow/Keras).

[^2]:  @RonnebergerFB15

1.  It demonstrates how to perform data augmentation for an image segmentation task.

2.  It uses [luz](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/), `torch`'s high-level interface, to train the model.

> 3.  It [JIT-traces](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2021-08-10-jit-trace-module/) the trained model and saves it for deployment on mobile devices.

Reviewer: I think you need to spell out the words for JIT at least once in this post. Since this is the first mention, it's the logical choice (though I know that's unappealing, given it's in a bullet _and_ a hyphenated term).

Author: absolutely, will do!

4.  It includes proof-of-concept code (though not a discussion) of the saved model being run on Android.

> And if you think that this, in itself, is not exciting enough -- our task here is to find cats and dogs. What could be more helpful than a mobile application making sure you can distinguish your cat from the fluffy sofa she's reposing on?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And if you think that this in itself is not exciting enough -- our task here is to find cats and dogs. What could be more helpful than a mobile application making sure you can distinguish your cat from the fluffy sofa she's reposing on?
```

Reviewer: 🐈🛋

![A cat from the Oxford Pet Dataset (@parkhi12a).](images/Abyssinian_47.jpg)

## Train in R

We start by preparing the data.

### Pre-processing and data augmentation

As provided by `torchdatasets`, the [Oxford Pet Dataset](https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/data/pets/) comes with three variants of target data to choose from: the overall class (cat or dog), the individual breed (there are thirty-seven of them), and a pixel-level segmentation with three categories: foreground, boundary, and background. The latter is the default; and it's exactly the type of target we need.

A call to `oxford_pet_dataset(root = dir)` will trigger the initial download:

```{r}
# need torch > 0.6.1
# may have to run remotes::install_github("mlverse/torch") depending on when you read this
library(torch) 
library(torchvision)
library(torchdatasets)
library(luz)

dir <- "~/.torch-datasets/oxford_pet_dataset"

ds <- oxford_pet_dataset(root = dir)
```

> Images (and corresponding masks) come in different sizes. For training, however, we'll need all of them to be the same size. This can straightforwardly be accomplished by passing in `transform =` and `target_transform =` arguments. But what about data augmentation (basically always a useful measure to take)? Imagine we make use of random flipping. An input image will be flipped -- or not -- according to some probability. But if the image is flipped, the mask better had be, as well! Input and target transformations are not independent, in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Images (and corresponding masks) come in different sizes. For training, however, we'll need all of them to be the same size. This can be accomplished by passing in `transform =` and `target_transform =` arguments. But what about data augmentation (basically always a useful measure to take)? Imagine we make use of random flipping. An input image will be flipped -- or not -- according to some probability. But if the image is flipped, the mask better had be, as well! Input and target transformations are not independent, in this case.
```

Reviewer: _straightforwardly_ just sounded like a mouthful, and I think the sentence makes sense without it 👍

```{r}
pet_dataset <- torch::dataset(
  
  inherit = oxford_pet_dataset,
  
  initialize = function(..., size, normalize = TRUE, augmentation = NULL) {
    
    self$augmentation <- augmentation
    
    input_transform <- function(x) {
      x <- x %>%
        transform_to_tensor() %>%
        transform_resize(size) 
      if (isTRUE(normalize)) x <- x %>%
        transform_normalize(mean = c(0.485, 0.456, 0.406),
                            std = c(0.229, 0.224, 0.225))
      x
    }
    
    target_transform <- function(x) {
      x <- torch_tensor(x, dtype = torch_long())
      x <- x[newaxis,..]
      # interpolation = 0 makes sure we still end up with integer classes
      x <- transform_resize(x, size, interpolation = 0)
    }
    
    self$split <- split
    
    super$initialize(
      ...,
      transform = input_transform,
      target_transform = target_transform
    )
    
  },
  .getitem = function(i) {
    
    item <- super$.getitem(i)
    if (!is.null(self$augmentation)) 
      self$augmentation(item)
    else
      list(x = item$x, y = item$y[1,..])
  }
)
```

> All we have to do now is create a custom function that lets us decide on what augmentation to apply once per input-target pair, and then, manually call the respective transformation functions.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to say "what augmentation to apply to each input-target pair"? It's simpler, but it could obscure some nuance of what's being done that I don't fully undersand.

```{r}
valid_ds_4plot <- pet_dataset(
  root = dir,
  split = "valid",
  size = c(224, 224),
  normalize = FALSE
)
```

Finally, the predictions are generated in a loop, and overlaid over the images one-by-one:

```{r}
indices <- 1:8

preds <- predict(fitted, dataloader(dataset_subset(valid_ds, indices)))

png("pet_segmentation.png", width = 1200, height = 600, bg = "black")

par(mfcol = c(2, 4), mar = rep(2, 4))

for (i in indices) {
  
  mask <- as.array(torch_argmax(preds[i,..], 1)$to(device = "cpu"))
  mask <- raster::ratify(raster::raster(mask))
  
  img <- as.array(valid_ds_4plot[i][[1]]$permute(c(2,3,1)))
  cond <- img > 0.99999
  img[cond] <- 0.99999
  img <- raster::brick(img)
  
  # plot image
  raster::plotRGB(img, scale = 1, asp = 1, margins = TRUE)
  # overlay mask
  plot(mask, alpha = 0.4, legend = FALSE, axes = FALSE, add = TRUE)
  
}
```

![Learned segmentation masks, overlaid on images from the validation set.](images/pet_segmentation.png)

> Now on to running this model "in the wild" (well, sort of).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now onto running this model "in the wild" (well, sort of).
```

## JIT-trace and run on Android

Tracing the trained model will convert it to a form that can be loaded in R-less environments -- for example, from Python, C++, or Java.

<aside>Please see our [introduction to the torch JIT compiler](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2021-08-10-jit-trace-module/).</aside>

We access the `torch` model underlying the fitted `luz` object, and trace it -- where tracing means calling it once, on a sample observation:

```{r}
m <- fitted$model
x <- coro::collect(train_dl, 1)

traced <- jit_trace(m, x[[1]]$x)
```

The traced model could now be saved for use with Python or C++, like so:

```{r}
traced %>% jit_save("traced_model.pt")
```

> However, since we already know we'd like to deploy it on Android, we directly make use of the specialized function `jit_save_for_mobile()` that, additionally, generates bytecode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, since we already know we'd like to deploy it on Android, we make direct use of the specialized function `jit_save_for_mobile()` that, additionally, generates bytecode:
```

Author: yeah, that doesn't really convey what I had in mind ... a good sign that what I originally wrote was a bad choice! Will find something else

library(torch) 
library(torchvision)
library(torchdatasets)
library(luz)

dir <- "~/.torch-datasets/oxford_pet_dataset"

ds <- oxford_pet_dataset(root = dir)
```

Images (and corresponding masks) come in different sizes. For training, however, we'll need all of them to be the same size. This can be accomplished by passing in `transform =` and `target_transform =` arguments. But what about data augmentation (basically always a useful measure to take)? Imagine we make use of random flipping. An input image will be flipped -- or not -- according to some probability. But if the image is flipped, the mask better had be, as well! Input and target transformations are not independent, in this case.

A solution is to create a wrapper around `oxford_pet_dataset()` that lets us "hook into" the `.getitem()` method, like so:

```{r}
pet_dataset <- torch::dataset(
  
  inherit = oxford_pet_dataset,
  
  initialize = function(..., size, normalize = TRUE, augmentation = NULL) {
    
    self$augmentation <- augmentation
    
    input_transform <- function(x) {
      x <- x %>%
        transform_to_tensor() %>%
        transform_resize(size) 
      if (isTRUE(normalize)) x <- x %>%

>         transform_normalize(mean = c(0.485, 0.456, 0.406),

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a quick comment on why we use these numbers on normalize?

Author: will do!

  
  vflip <- runif(1) > 0.5
  
  x <- item$x
  y <- item$y
  
  if (isTRUE(vflip)) {
    x <- transform_vflip(x)
    y <- transform_vflip(y)
  }
  
  x <- transform_color_jitter(x, brightness = 0.5, saturation = 0.3, contrast = 0.3)
  
  list(x = x, y = y[1,..])
```

We now make use of the wrapper, `pet_dataset()`, to instantiate the training and validation sets, and create the respective data loaders.

```{r}
train_ds <- pet_dataset(root = dir,
                        split = "train",
                        size = c(224, 224),
                        augmentation = augmentation)
valid_ds <- pet_dataset(root = dir,
                        split = "valid",
                        size = c(224, 224))

train_dl <- dataloader(train_ds, batch_size = 32, shuffle = TRUE)
valid_dl <- dataloader(valid_ds, batch_size = 32)
```

### Model training and (visual) evaluation

With `luz`, model training is a matter of two verbs, `setup()` and `fit()`. The learning rate has been determined, for this specific case, using `luz::lr_finder()`; you will likely have to change it when experimenting with different forms of data augmentation (and different data sets).

```{r}

> model <- model %>%

Reviewer 2: I think it would be useful to have a reference on to where one can find the model definition.

Author: Oops??? I have no idea what happened here ... that model definition part went missing! Normally I keep intermediate backups (not on GH), - will add it back tomorrow ...
What luck you spotted this!!!
